# Overview

In this section we provide several example scripts of how to interface with the data generated by HBT-HERONS. We also use the examples we provide to illustrate some of the less-trivial concepts within HBT-HERONS.

* [Population-level properties](./population_level_statistics.md): bound mass function, peak bound mass function and merger rates.
* [Halo substructure and hierarchy](./internal_halo_population.md): satellite peak mass function, spatial distribution and subhalo hierarchy.
* [Merger tree traversal](./merger_trees.md): evolution of subhaloes, obtaining secondary progenitors and merger mass ratios.

We have written the code so that you can apply it to any HBT-HERONS catalogue, including your own. However, if you do not have any such catalogue available yet, we provide an example that you can [download following the steps below](#example-catalogue).

## HBTReader

The HBT-HERONS repository comes with a Python file (`/toolbox/HBTReader.py`) that contains functions to interface with the catalogues. To import, add the directory containing `HBTReader.py` to your path:

```python
import sys
sys.path.append(f"{HBT_HERONS_PATH}/toolbox")
from HBTReader import HBTReader
```
Opening the catalogue for a given simulation can be done using:

``` python
catalogue = HBTReader(f"{CATALOGUE_PATH}", sorted_catalogues=False)
```
Opening the catalogue will automatically read which simulation outputs have a saved HBT-HERONS catalogue. The boolean parameter `sorted_catalogues` indicates whether the catalogues have been post-processed with [`toolbox/catalogue_cleanup/SortCatalogues.py`](https://github.com/SWIFTSIM/HBT-HERONS/blob/master/toolbox/catalogue_cleanup/SortCatalogues.py). We strongly recommend executing that script, as it will speed up operations.

The code examples we provide in this section always use the class `HBTReader` to load data. However, it can be preferrable to read the HDF5 files directly once you become more familiar with the catalogue formatting and the way in which different datasets can be used. The reason why it is recommended to use HDF5 files directly for very big simulations is that a parallel script can be implemented, whereas no such functionality is available in `HBTReader`.

### Methods

The methods implemented in `HBTReader` are designed to be used for the following common tasks:

*   `LoadSubhaloProperties`: load one or more properties of all subhaloes at a specific output number.
*   `LoadSubhaloEvolution`: load one or more properties of specific subhaloes at a specific output number.
*   `LoadSubhaloEvolution`: load the evolution of one ore more properties of specific subhaloes. It returns the evolution from the time when they were first resolved until the last available HBT-HERONS output, even if the subhaloes have become an orphan.
*   `GetAllProgenitors`: identify the direct and indirect secondary progenitors of a subhalo. The direct and indirect classification reflects whether the subhalo progenitor merged directly with the specified subhalo or not.
*   `GetSinkProgenitors`: identify the direct secondary progenitors of a subhalo that became orphans by sinking.
*   `GetDisruptedProgenitors`:  identify the direct secondary progenitors of a subhalo that became orphans by disruption.

## Example catalogue

We have generated an example HBT-HERONS catalogue from a dark-matter-only simulation of a $(25\,\mathrm{Mpc}^{3})$ volume with a particle mass of $m_{\rm p} = 10^{9}\,\mathrm{M}_{\odot}$. Outputs are logaritmically-spaced in expansion factor, and 64 of them are saved from redshift $z = 10$ to $z = 0$.

To download, run the following:

```bash
wget https://hbt-herons.strw.leidenuniv.nl/data/ExampleCatalogues.tar.gz
tar -xzvf ExampleCatalogues.tar.gz
```

Once unzipped, there will be two directories:

*   **`RawCatalogues`**: This folder contains the actual outputs of runnning HBT-HERONS, except for particle information (`SubhaloParticles`) and restart files (`SrcSnap`). Each simulation output has a dedicated folder named `{SnapNumber:03d}`, which contains four files named `SubSnap_{SnapNumber:03d}.{MPI_rank}.hdf5`. The number of files reflects the fact that 4 MPI ranks were used to run this HBT-HERONS example.
*   **`SortedCatalogues`**: This folder contains the recommended way of interfacing with HBT-HERONS catalogues, but it requires a post-processing step that involves running [`toolbox/catalogue_cleanup/SortCatalogues.py`](https://github.com/SWIFTSIM/HBT-HERONS/blob/master/toolbox/catalogue_cleanup/SortCatalogues.py). This script merges all files generated by MPI ranks, so that there is only a single file per simulation output (`OrderedSubSnap_{SnapNumber:03d}.hdf5`). It additionally sorts the subhalo entries according to their `TrackId`, which is benefitial because there is a direct correspondence between `TrackId` and its positional index within the dataset.

The code we provide can be used to use to load either format, so we recommend playing around with both to get a feeling about what the advantages of using one versus the other are.
